OSDOCS-20033: Kueue 1.4 and DRA (#113996)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/kueue-dra-partitionable-devices.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * ai_workloads/kueue/kueue-dra-integrating-dynamic-resource-allocation.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="kueue-dra-partitionable-devices_{context}"]
= Configuring the partitionable devices

[role="_abstract"]

> Use this procedure when your cluster has partitionable devices and you want quota to reflect actual device capacity rather than device count. This requires {product-title} 4.22 or later. 

Reviewer: Suggestion:
`Use this procedure when your cluster has partitionable devices, such as NVIDIA MIG-capable GPUs (A100 or H100), and you want quota to reflect actual device capacity rather than device count. Enabling it on non-MIG hardware prevents the DRA driver from publishing GPU ResourceSlices, making all GPUs invisible to the scheduler. This requires {product-title} 4.22 or later.

Author: Replaced the paragraph with Alice's suggestion.

.Procedure

> . Enable the feature gate and configure counter sources by installing or reconfiguring {kueue-name} with the `KueueDRAIntegrationPartitionableDevices` feature gate enabled and a sources entry in `deviceClassMappings`.

Reviewer: @sohankunkerkar @PannagaRao does the user need to enable the featureGate?

Reviewer 2: No. A user can't enable this feature gate.

Reviewer: @StephenJamesSmith please check comment above.

Author: I am removing this step.

+
[source,yaml]
----

> apiVersion: config.kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2

Reviewer: I'm confused about this. The correct user action on OCP is patching the Kueue CR (are you talking about it?), is:

```
oc patch kueue cluster --type=merge -p '{
    "spec": {
      "config": {
        "resources": {
          "deviceClassMappings": [{
            "name": "gpu.memory",
            "deviceClassNames": ["gpu.nvidia.com"],
            "sources": [{
              "type": "Counter",
              "counter": {
                "name": "memory",
                "driver": "gpu.nvidia.com"
              }
            }]
          }]
        }
      }
    }
  }'
```

And the feature gate part (KueueDRAIntegrationPartitionableDevices: true) is not user-configurable — the operator auto-enables it.

Author: @sohankunkerkar ?

Author: See Sohan's rewrite.

kind: Configuration
featureGates:
  KueueDRAIntegrationPartitionableDevices: true
resources:
  deviceClassMappings:
  - name: gpu.memory
    deviceClassNames:
    - gpu.nvidia.com
    sources:
    - counter:
        name: memory
        driver: gpu.nvidia.com
        deviceSelector:
          cel:
            expression: "device.driver == 'gpu.nvidia.com'"
----

. The `sources[].counter.name` must match a counter key published by your DRA driver in `ResourceSlice` devices. You can inspect these using the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get resourceslices -o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.spec.driver}{"\t"}{range .spec.devices[*]}{.name}: {.consumesCounters}{"\n"}{end}{end}'
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
gpu.nvidia.com  gpu-0: [{"counterSet":"shared","counters":{"memory":{"value":"10Gi"}}}]
----

. Use the following command to add the counter resource to your `ClusterQueue`. Set the quota in counter units, for example, `256Mi` instead of device count `1`. When ClusterQueues share a cohort, ensure all queues use the same unit scale for counter resources. Kueue does not validate unit consistency across ClusterQueues.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc apply -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/dra/sample-dra-counter-queues.yaml

Reviewer: Can we point other repos files ([kubernetes](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/dra/sample-dra-counter-queues.yaml))? 
Right below, we're already telling the user how to create a ResourceFlavor, ClusterQueue and LocalQueue. Can't we just ask the user to create a file with this context and apply it? Just like we're recommending on line ```. Create a file called `cluster-queue.yaml` that contains the following content``` ([here](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/113996/changes#diff-50e686ab942a05f0afecd2feb3d4f0e5f49175c442dbe9a013e83a970da6d9fcR49))

Author: @sohankunkerkar ?

Author: See Sohan's rewrite.

----
+
.Example output
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ResourceFlavor
metadata:
  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  namespaceSelector: {}
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "gpu.memory"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 40
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 200Gi
      - name: "gpu.memory"
        nominalQuota: 800Gi
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: LocalQueue
metadata:
  namespace: "default"
  name: "user-queue"
spec:
  clusterQueue: "cluster-queue"
----

. Use the following command to verify counter-based quota is working by submitting a test workload:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc create -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/dra/sample-dra-counter-job.yaml

Reviewer: Same as https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/113996/changes#diff-d7fb815ba9aedc31647e85ba1d8729ee1204e4145b1e41b414407aef3c2a4aceR53.

Author: See Sohan's rewrite.

`deviceSelector`:: Scopes which devices are eligible for counter-based quota accounting.
+
[NOTE]
====
The {kueue-name} Operator automatically enables the required {kueue-name} feature gates when it detects the `DRAPartitionableDevices` Kubernetes feature gate and `sources` are configured in `deviceClassMappings`. No manual {kueue-name} feature gate configuration is required.
====

. Create a `ClusterQueue` with counter-based quota. Set the quota in capacity units rather than device count. Create a file called `pd-queues.yaml` with the following content:
+
.Example quota configuration for partitionable devices
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ResourceFlavor
metadata:
  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  namespaceSelector: {}
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "gpu.memory"] 
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 40
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 200Gi
      - name: "gpu.memory" 
        nominalQuota: 800Gi
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2

> kind: LocalQueue

Reviewer: Same as https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/113996/changes#r3582729980.

Suggestion: add the localqueue creation to this yaml, the same way it was suggested for Extended Resources.

Author: Added the suggested example.

`name: "gpu.memory"`:: Sets the total GPU memory quota. For example, `800Gi` accommodates twenty A100-40GB GPUs or equivalent MIG partitions.
+
[NOTE]
====
When `ClusterQueue` objects share a cohort, ensure all queues use the same unit scale for counter resources. {kueue-name} does not validate unit consistency across `ClusterQueue` objects.
====

. Apply the quota configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f pd-queues.yaml
----

. Create a workload that requests a MIG partition. Create a file called `pd-job.yaml` with the following content:
+
.Example workload requesting a MIG partition
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  namespace: team-a
  name: gpu-partition
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: gpu
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: mig.nvidia.com 
          count: 1
          selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: "device.attributes['gpu.nvidia.com'].profile == '1g.5gb'" 
---
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:

>   generateName: pd-test-job-

Reviewer: If we apply "pd-queues.yaml" as the example, the following error will be shown: 
`❯ oc apply -f pd-job.yaml
resourceclaimtemplate.resource.k8s.io/gpu-partition created
error: from pd-test-job-: cannot use generate name with apply`

We need to change from: 
`generateName: pd-test-job-`
to: 
`name: pd-test-job`

Author: Changed.

  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue 
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: worker
        image: registry.k8s.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.53
        args: ["pause"]
        resources:
          claims:
          - name: gpu
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: "200Mi"
      resourceClaims:
      - name: gpu

>         resourceClaimTemplateName: gpu-partition # <4>

Reviewer: There's a number # <4> here, I guess we can remove it.

Author: removed.

      restartPolicy: Never
----
`deviceClassName:`:: References the MIG `DeviceClass`.

`expression:`:: Selects a specific MIG partition profile. Available profiles depend on the GPU model, for example, `1g.5gb`, `2g.10gb`, `3g.20gb`, or `7g.40gb` for the A100-40GB.

`kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name:`:: Identifies the local queue to submit the job to.

`resourceClaimTemplateName:`:: References the `ResourceClaimTemplate` defined above. The `ResourceClaimTemplate` must exist in the same namespace as the job.

. Create the workload by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f pd-job.yaml
----

.Verification

. Verify that the workload is admitted and that quota was charged in capacity units by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n team-a get workloads -o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}: {.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].resourceUsage}{"\n"}{end}'
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----

> job-pd-test-job-xxxxx: {"cpu":"1","gpu.memory":"4864Mi","memory":"200Mi"}

Reviewer 3: The gpu.memory value in the example output would display as raw bytes, not Mi. In this case it would show "gpu.memory":"5100273664" rather than "gpu.memory":"4864Mi".

@sohankunkerkar do you agree we should update the example to show the actual output format?

Author: @sohankunkerkar I updated the value. Please verify.

Reviewer 4: @PannagaRao From the code, resourceUsage uses `resource.Quantity` which serializes as BinarySI strings and the NVIDIA driver publishes with resource.BinarySI format, and Kueue preserves it. For 4864 MiB, Quantity.String() outputs "4864Mi". But if you're seeing raw bytes in actual test output, could you share the exact `oc get workloads -o jsonpath` output? It's possible the driver version or GPU model produces a non-MiB-aligned value that causes Quantity to fall back to raw byte representation.

Reviewer 3: On a A100-SXM4-40GB cluster with NVIDIA DRA driver and MIG 1g.10gb profile,  the driver publishes consumesCounters.memory: "9984Mi" in the ResourceSlice, but the workload resourceUsage jsonpath output shows raw bytes: ` job-pd-blog-job-ef627: {"cpu":"100m","gpu.memory":"10468982784","memory":"100Mi"}`

I think BinarySI format is preserved for standard memory resource and not custom resources which hits the default DecimalSI format. https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/resources/requests.go#L113-L125

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the confirmation. I filed a bug for this: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/12982 Pratically, it should be in user readable format.

----
+
The `gpu.memory` value reflects the actual memory capacity of the requested MIG partition rather than a device count of `1`.

. If the workload is not admitted, verify the following:
+
* The `DRAPartitionableDevices` Kubernetes feature gate is enabled on the cluster.
* The `deviceClassMappings` `name` value matches the resource name in `coveredResources`.
* The `counter.name` in `sources` matches a counter key in the `ResourceSlice` objects.
* The `ClusterQueue` has sufficient GPU memory quota for the requested partition size.

> * MIG is enabled on the GPU hardware.

Reviewer 3: @sohankunkerkar  Do you think we need to call out the alpha limitation that extended resources and counter sources cannot be used together on the same DeviceClass in this doc?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, good call!

Reviewer 3: ```
[NOTE]
Extended resources and counter-based sources cannot be used together on the same `DeviceClass`. If a workload uses the extended resource syntax (for example, `nvidia.com/gpu: "1"`) and the `DeviceClass` mapping has counter sources configured, the workload is marked inadmissible. For more details, see link: [Path Interactions](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/keps/2941-DRA/README.md#path-interactions) in the upstream Kueue documentation.
```
@StephenJamesSmith Can we add this block in `kueue-dra-partitionable-devices.adoc` ? I'll leave the placement to you.

Author: @PannagaRao Where can I find the limitations? I found this - 

In the alpha phase of Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)] combining extended resources and counter sources on the same DeviceClass is not supported. You must define separate device classes if you intend to track countable extended resources (like specific GPUs) alongside capacity or counter-based attributes within your cluster.

DRA models devices use attributes rather than just counting quantities. Extended resources track hard limits, that is the total integer counts of hardware. Counter sources manage granular, sliceable, or dynamic capacity constraints. Mixing these two different allocation models within a single DeviceClass causes scheduling conflicts, because the kube-scheduler attempts to reconcile discrete claims against dynamic capacity simultaneously.

You can mitigate these limitations by separating the classes: Create one DeviceClass for your countable extended resources and a completely separate DeviceClass for counter capacities.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/keps/2941-DRA/README.md#path-interactions

I have added this link in the NOTE suggestion

Author: Two issues with this link: 1) I can only put links in the ASSEMBLY, which may not be a problem because that's probably the best place to put the NOTE. 2) We have restrictions about xrefs to external repos. I can try it, but it may get rejected in `Merge review`.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * ai_workloads/kueue/kueue-dra-integrating-dynamic-resource-allocation.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="kueue-dra-partitionable-devices_{context}"]
= Configuring the partitionable devices

[role="_abstract"]

> You can configure {kueue-name} to manage quota for partitionable devices based on actual device capacity rather than device count. Partitionable devices, such as NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) capable GPUs like the A100 or H100, allow a single GPU to be dynamically subdivided into smaller partitions.

Reviewer 5: Make sure that the short description is no longer than 300 characters.

----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
gpu.nvidia.com	gpu-0: [{"counterSet":"shared","counters":{"memory":{"value":"40Gi"}}}]
----
+
If the output does not show `consumesCounters` data, verify that your DRA driver version supports partitionable devices and that MIG is enabled on the GPU hardware.

. Configure counter-based quota by adding a `deviceClassMappings` entry with a `sources` section to the `config.resources` section of the {kueue-name} CR, as shown in the following example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kueue.openshift.io/v1
kind: Kueue
metadata:
  name: cluster
  namespace: openshift-kueue-operator
spec:
  config:
    resources:
      deviceClassMappings:
      - name: gpu.memory 
        deviceClassNames: 
        - gpu.nvidia.com
        - mig.nvidia.com
        sources: 
        - type: Counter
          counter:
            name: memory 
            driver: gpu.nvidia.com
            deviceSelector: 
              type: CEL
              cel:
                expression: "device.driver == 'gpu.nvidia.com'"
# ...
----

> `name: gpu.memory`:: The logical resource name used in `ClusterQueue` quotas. When counter-based sources are configured, quota is charged in capacity units rather than device count.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
+
where:
+
`spec.config.resources.deviceClassMappings.name: gpu.memory`:: The logical resource name used in `ClusterQueue` quotas. When counter-based sources are configured, quota is charged in capacity units rather than device count.
```
When describing YAML fields, use full dot notation. For example, use “spec.tolerations.operators”, not just  “operators” or  “tolerations.operators”. Source: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1j78SA8Y-ZRlVATbVe6D8bdYj7mQzzhOJtGt1xH_3qa0/edit?usp=sharing

> 

Reviewer 5: Be sure to use full dot notation for the following items in the definition list.

`deviceClassNames`:: The `DeviceClass` names that map to this resource. Include both the whole-GPU class (`gpu.nvidia.com`) and the MIG class (`mig.nvidia.com`).

`sources`:: Defines how {kueue-name} computes the quota charge.

`name: memory`:: The counter name must match a counter key published by the DRA driver in `ResourceSlice` devices.

`deviceSelector`:: Scopes which devices are eligible for counter-based quota accounting.
+
[NOTE]
====
The {kueue-name} Operator automatically enables the required {kueue-name} feature gates when it detects the `DRAPartitionableDevices` Kubernetes feature gate and `sources` are configured in `deviceClassMappings`. No manual {kueue-name} feature gate configuration is required.
====

> . Create a `ClusterQueue` with counter-based quota. Set the quota in capacity units rather than device count. Create a file called `pd-queues.yaml` with the following content:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Create a `ClusterQueue` object with counter-based quota. Set the quota in capacity units rather than device count. Create a file called `pd-queues.yaml` with the following content:
```

+
.Example quota configuration for partitionable devices
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ResourceFlavor
metadata:
  name: "default-flavor"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
metadata:
  name: "cluster-queue"
spec:
  namespaceSelector: {}
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "gpu.memory"] 
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 40
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 200Gi
      - name: "gpu.memory" 
        nominalQuota: 800Gi
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: team-a
  labels:
    kueue.openshift.io/managed: "true"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: LocalQueue
metadata:
  namespace: "team-a"
  name: "user-queue"
spec:
  clusterQueue: "cluster-queue"

> ----

Reviewer 5: See previous comments about callouts for YAML. Be sure to precede a definition list with "where:", and use full dot notation.

`coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "gpu.memory"]`:: The `gpu.memory` entry must match the `name` value in `deviceClassMappings`.

`name: "gpu.memory"`:: Sets the total GPU memory quota. For example, `800Gi` accommodates twenty A100-40GB GPUs or equivalent MIG partitions.
+
[NOTE]
====
When `ClusterQueue` objects share a cohort, ensure all queues use the same unit scale for counter resources. {kueue-name} does not validate unit consistency across `ClusterQueue` objects.
====

. Apply the quota configuration by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc apply -f pd-queues.yaml
----

> . Create a workload that requests a MIG partition. Create a file called `pd-job.yaml` with the following content:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Create a workload that requests a MIG partition by creating a file called `pd-job.yaml`, as shown in the following example:
```

+
.Example workload requesting a MIG partition
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  namespace: team-a
  name: gpu-partition
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: gpu
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: mig.nvidia.com 
          count: 1
          selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: "device.attributes['gpu.nvidia.com'].profile == '1g.5gb'" 
---
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  generateName: pd-test-job
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue 
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: worker
        image: registry.k8s.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.53
        args: ["pause"]
        resources:
          claims:
          - name: gpu
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: "200Mi"
      resourceClaims:
      - name: gpu
        resourceClaimTemplateName: gpu-partition 
      restartPolicy: Never

> ----

Reviewer 5: See previous comments about callouts for YAML.

`kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name:`:: Identifies the local queue to submit the job to.

`resourceClaimTemplateName:`:: References the `ResourceClaimTemplate` defined above. The `ResourceClaimTemplate` must exist in the same namespace as the job.

. Create the workload by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create -f pd-job.yaml
----

.Verification

. Verify that the workload is admitted and that quota was charged in capacity units by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc -n team-a get workloads -o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}: {.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].resourceUsage}{"\n"}{end}'
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
job-pd-test-job-xxxxx: {"cpu":"1","gpu.memory":"5100273664","memory":"200Mi"}
----
+
The `gpu.memory` value reflects the actual memory capacity of the requested MIG partition rather than a device count of `1`.

. If the workload is not admitted, verify the following:
+
* The `DRAPartitionableDevices` Kubernetes feature gate is enabled on the cluster.

> * The `deviceClassMappings` `name` value matches the resource name in `coveredResources`.

Reviewer 5: Try to reword this line so that `deviceClassMappings` is separated from `name`. For example:

```suggestion
* The `name` value of the `deviceClassMappings` object matches the resource name in `coveredResources`.
```
